The Hacker's Guide to SAMS
=============================

Please read this document if you are contributing to SAMS.

BRL-CAD is a relatively large package with a long history and
heritage.  Many people have contributed over the years, and there
continues to be room for involvement and improvement in just about
every aspect of the package.  As such, contributions to BRL-CAD are
very welcome and appreciated.

For the sake of code consistency, project coherency, and the long-term
evolution of BRL-CAD, there are guidelines for getting involved.
Contributors are strongly encouraged to follow these guidelines and to
likewise ensure that other contributors similarly follow the
guidelines.  There are simply too many religious wars over what
usually come down to personal preferences and familiarity that are
distractions from making productive progress.

These guidelines apply to all developers, documentation writers,
testers, porters, graphic designers, web designers, and anyone else
that is directly contributing to BRL-CAD.  As all contributors are
also directly assisting in the development of BRL-CAD as a package,
this guide often simply refers to contributors as developers.

Although BRL-CAD was originally developed and supported primarily by
the U.S. Army Research Laboratory and its affiliates, it is now a true
Open Source project with contributions coming in to the project from
around the world.  The U.S. Army Research Laboratory continues to
support and contribute to BRL-CAD, but now the project is primarily
driven by a team of core developers and the BRL-CAD open source
community.  Contact the BRL-CAD developers for more information.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
-----------------
  Introduction
  Table of Contents
  Getting Started
  How to Contribute
  Source Code Languages
  Filesystem Organization
  Coding Style & Standards
  Documentation
  Testing & Debugging
  Patch Submission Guidelines
  Bugs & Unexpected Behavior
  Commit Access
  Contributor Responsibilities
  Version Numbers & Compatibility
  Naming a Source Release
  Naming a Binary Release
  Making a Release
  Patching a Release
  Getting Help


GETTING STARTED
---------------

As there are many ways to get started with BRL-CAD, one of the most
important steps for new contributors to do is get involved in the
discussions and communicate with the BRL-CAD developers.  There are
mailing lists, on-line forums, and an IRC channel dedicated to BRL-CAD
development and project communication.  All contributors are
encouraged to participate in any of the available communication
channels:

* Internet Relay Chat

  The primary and generally preferred mechanism for interactive
  developer discussions is via Internet Relay Chat (IRC).  Several of
  the core developers and core contributors of BRL-CAD hang out in
  #brlcad on the Freenode network.  With most any IRC client, you
  should be able to join #brlcad on irc.freenode.net, port 6667.  See
  http://freenode.net and http://irchelp.org for more information

* E-mail Mailing Lists

  There are several mailing lists available for interaction, e.g. the
  http://sourceforge.net/mail/?group_id=105292 "brlcad-devel" mailing
  list.  More involved contributors may also be interested in joining
  the "brlcad-commits" and "brlcad-tracker" mailing lists.

* On-line Forums

  Discussion forums are available on the project site at
  http://sourceforge.net/forum/?group_id=105292 for both developers
  and users.  Of particular interest to developers is, of course, the
  "Developers" forum where all contributors are encouraged to
  participate.


HOW TO CONTRIBUTE
-----------------

SAMS's open source management structure is best described as a
meritocracy.  Roughly stated, this basically means that the power to
make decisions lies directly with the individuals that have ability or
merit with respect to BRL-CAD.  An individual's ability and merit is
basically a function of their past and present contributions to the
project.  Those who constructively contribute, frequently interact,
and remain highly involved have more say than those who do not.

As BRL-CAD is comprised of a rather large code base with extensive
existing documentation and web resources, there are many many places
where one may begin to get involved with the project.  More than
likely, there is some new goal you already have in mind, be it a new
geometry converter, support for a different image type, a fix to some
bug, an update to existing documentation, a new web page, or something
else entirely.  Regardless of the goal or contribution, it is highly
encouraged that you interact with the existing developers and discuss
your intentions.  This is particularly important if you would like to
see your modification added to BRL-CAD and you do not yet have
contributor access.  When in doubt, working on resolving existing
bugs, improving performance, documentation, and writing tests are
perfect places to begin.

For many, it can be overwhelming at just how much there is.  To a
certain extent, you will need to familiarize yourself with the basic
existing infrastructure before significantly changing or adding a
completely new feature.  There is documentation available in the
source distribution's doc/ directory, throughout the source hierarchy
in manpages, on the website, and potentially in the documentation
tracker at http://sourceforge.net/docman/?group_id=105292 covering a
wide variety of topics.  Consult the existing documentation, sources,
and developers to become more familiar with what already exists.

See the PATCH SUBMISSION GUIDELINES section below for details on
preparing and providing contributions.


REFACTORING
-----------

proportion -> integrity -> clarity

Refactoring is one of the most useful activities a contributor can
make to BRL-CAD.  Code refactoring involves reviewing and rewriting
source code to be more maintainable through reduced complexity and
improved readability, structure, and extensibility.

For each source file in BRL-CAD, the following checklist applies:

* Consistent indentation.  See CODING STYLE & STANDARDS below.
  Indents every 4 characters, tab stops at 8 characters with BSD KNF
  indentation style.  The sh/indent.sh script will format a file
  automatically, but requires a manual review afterwards.

* Consistent whitespace.  See CODING STYLE & STANDARDS below, section
  on stylistic whitespace.

* Headers.  Only including headers that declare functions used by that
  file.  If system headers are required, then common.h should be the
  first header included.

* Comments.  All public functions are documented with doxygen
  comments.  Move public comments to the public header that declares
  the function.  Format block comments to column 70 with only one
  space (not tabs) after the asterisk.  Comments should explain why
  more than what.

* Magic numbers.  Eliminate constant numbers embedded in the code
  wherever feasible, instead preferring dynamic/unbounded allocation.

* Public symbols.  Public API symbols should be prefixed with the
  library that they belong to and declared in a public header.  Public
  symbols should consistently (only) use underscores, not CamelCase.

* Private symbols.  Private functions should be declared HIDDEN.

* Dead code.  Code that is commented out should be removed unless it
  serves a specific documentation purpose.

* Duplicate code.  Combine common functionality into a private
  function or new public API routine.  Once and only once.

* Verbose compilation warnings.  Quell them all.

* Globals.  Eliminate globals by pulling them into an appropriate
  scope and passing as parameters or embedding them in structures as
  data.

In addition, don't be afraid to rewrite code or throw away code that
"smells bad".  No code is sacred.  Perfection is achieved not when
there is nothing more to add but, rather, when there is nothing more
to take away.


SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
-------------------


LIBRARIES
---------



FILESYSTEM ORGANIZATION
-----------------------

SAMS has a STABLE branch in GIT that should always compile and run
with expected behavior on all supported platforms.  Contrary to
STABLE, the GIT MASTER trunk is generally expected to compile but more
flexibility is allowed for resolution of cross-platform build issues
and on-going development.



SOURCE CODE LANGUAGES
---------------------

The vast majority of BRL-CAD is written in ANSI C with the intent to
be strictly conformant to the C standard.  A majority of the MGED
geometry editor is written in a combination of C, Tcl/Tk, and Incr
Tcl/Tk.  The BRL-CAD Benchmark, build system, and utility scripts are
written in what should be POSIX-compliant Bourne Shell Script.  An
initial implementation of a BRL-CAD Geometry Server is written in PHP.

With release 7.0, BRL-CAD has moved forward and worked toward making
all of BRL-CAD C code conform strictly with the ANSI/ISO standard for
C language compilation (ISO/IEC 9899:1990, i.e. c89).  Support for
older compilers and older K&R-based system facilities is being
migrated to build system declarations, preprocessor defines, or being
removed outright.  It's okay to make modifications that assume
compiler conformance with the ANSI C standard (c89).

There is currently no C++ interface to the core BRL-CAD libraries.
There are a few tools and enhancements to libraries that are
implemented in C++ (the new BREP object type in librt, for example),
but there are presently no C++ bindings available beyond experimental
developments.  While C++ as an implementation language of new tools
and new library interfaces is not prohibited, the mixing of C++
semantics and C++ code (including simple // style comments) in the
existing C files is not allowed.  As new interfaces are developed, new
contributors become involved, and C++ code integration becomes more
prevalent, the contributor guidelines will become reinforced with more
details.


CODING STYLE & STANDARDS
------------------------

For anyone who plans on contributing code, the following conventions
should be followed.  Contributions that do not conform are likely to
be ridiculed and rejected until they do.  ;-)

Violations of these rules in the existing code are not excuses to
follow suit.  If code is seen that doesn't conform, it may and should
be fixed.

Code Organization:

Code that is potentially useful to another application, or that may be
abstracted in such a way that it is useful to other applications,
should be put in a library and not in application directories.

C files use the .c extension.  Header files use the .h extension.  C++
files use the .cpp extension.  PHP files use the .php extension.
Tcl/Tk files use the .tcl/.tk extensions.  POSIX Bourne-style shell
scripts use the .sh extension.  Perl files use the .pl (program) or
.pm (module) extensions.

Source files go into the src/ directory on the top level, into a
corresponding directory for the category of binary or library that it
belongs to.  Documentation files go into the doc/ directory on the top
level, with the exception of manual (man) pages that should be
colocated with any corresponding source files.

Header files private to a library go into that library's directory.
Public header files go into the include/ directory on the top level.
Public header files should not include any headers that are private.
Headers should include any other headers that they require for correct
parsing (this is an on-going clean-up effort).  Public header files
should not include the common header.

Headers should be included in a particular order.  That order is
generally as follows:

  - any single "interface" header [optional]
  - the common header (unless the interface header includes it)
  - system headers
  - public headers
  - private headers

Applications may optionally provide an interface header that defines
common structures applicable to most or all files being compiled for
that application.  That interface header will generally be the first
file to be included, as it usually includes the common header and
system headers.  The common header should always be included before
any system header.  Standard C system headers should be included
before library system headers.  Headers should be written to be
self-contained, not requiring other headers to be necessarily included
before they may be used.  If another header is necessary for a header
to function correctly, it should include it.

Build System:

The CMake build system (more specifically, compilation test macros
defined in misc/CMake/BRLCAD_CheckFunctions.cmake) should be used
extensively to test for availability of system services such as
standard header files, available libraries, and data types.  No
assumptions should be made regarding the availability of any
particular header, function, datatype, or other resource.  After
running cmake, there will be an autogenerated include/brlcad_config.h
file that contains many preprocessor directives and type declarations
that may be used where needed.

Generic platform checks (e.g. #ifdef unix, #ifdef _WIN32) are highly
discouraged and should generally not be used.  Replace system checks
with tests for the actual facility being utilized instead.

The Windows platform utilizes its own manually-generated configure
results header (include/config_win.h) that has to be manually updated
if new tests are added to the CMake build logic.

Only the BRL-CAD sources should include and utilize the common.h
header.  They should not include brlcad_config.h or config_win.h
directly.  If used, the common.h header should be listed before any
system headers.

Language Compliance:

Features of C that conform to the ISO/IEC 9899-1990 C standard (C90)
are generally the baseline for strict language conformance.  As
BRL-CAD used to be K&R syntax conformant, there remains an on-going
effort to ensure a full conversion to a standards compliant ISO C
implementation.

Code Conventions:

Globals variables, structures, classes, and other public data
containers are highly discouraged within application code.  Do not add
any new globals to existing libraries.  Globals are often a quick
solution to some deeper coding problem.  However, they carry
significant maintenance costs, introduce (spaghetti) code complexity,
make multi-threading support more costly, pollute public API
(symbol-wise at a minimum), increase security risks, are error-prone
to use, and usually complicate refactoring and code restructuring in
the future.  Using static variables (whether function- or
static/file-scoped) is a viable alternative.  Restructuring the logic
to not be stateful is even better.

Functions should always specify a return type, including functions
that return int or void.  ANSI C prototypes should be used to declare
functions, not K&R function prototypes.

Exact floating point comparisons are unreliable without requiring
IEEE-compliant floating point math, but BRL-CAD does not require such
math for portability and performance reasons.  When floating point
comparisons are necessary, use the NEAR_EQUAL and NEAR_ZERO macros
with a specified tolerance or the EQUAL and ZERO macros where a
tolerance is indeterminate (all the macros are available by including
bn.h, part of libbn).  Examples:

  For known tolerances:

  * instead of "foo == 2.0" use "NEAR_EQUAL(foo, 2.0, tol)"
  * instead of "foo != 0.0" use "foo !NEAR_ZERO(foo, tol)"

  For indeterminate tolerances:

  * instead of "foo == 2.0" use "EQUAL(foo, 2.0)"
  * instead of "foo != 0.0" use "foo !ZERO(foo)"

There are several functions whose functionality are either wrapped or
implemented in a cross-platform manner by libbu.  This includes
functions related to memory allocation, command option parsing,
logging routines, and more.  The following functions and global
variables should be utilized instead of the standard C facility:

  bu_malloc() instead of malloc()
  bu_calloc() instead of calloc()
  bu_realloc() instead of realloc()
  bu_fgets() instead of fgets()
  bu_free() instead of free()
  bu_log() instead of printf()
  bu_bomb() instead of abort()
  bu_exit() instead of printf()+exit()
  bu_dirname() instead of dirname()
  bu_getopt() instead of getopt()
  bu_opterr instead of opterr
  bu_optind instead of optind
  bu_optopt instead of optopt
  bu_optarg instead of optarg
  bu_strlcat() instead of strcat(), strncat(), and strlcat()
  bu_strlcpy() instead of strcpy(), strncpy(), and strlcpy()
  bu_strcmp() and BU_STR_EQUAL() instead of strcmp()
  bu_strcasecmp() and BU_STR_EQUIV() instead of stricmp()/strcasecmp()
  bu_strncmp() instead of strncmp()
  bu_strcasecmp() instead of strnicmp()/strncasecmp()
  bu_file_delete() instead of unlink(), rmdir(), and remove()
  bu_sort() instead of qsort()

Similarly, ANSI C functions are preferred over the BSD and POSIX
interfaces.  The following functions should be used:

  memset() instead of bzero()
  memcpy() instead of bcopy()

The code should strive to achieve conformance with the GNU coding
standard with a few exceptions.  One such exception is NOT utilizing
the GNU indentation style, but instead utilizing the BSD KNF
indentation style which is basically the K&R indentation style with 4
character indents.  The following examples should be strictly adhered
to, if only for the sake of being consistent.

1) Indentation whitespace

Indents are 4 characters, tabs are 8 characters.  There should be an
emacs and vi local variables block setting at the end of each file to
adopt, enforce, and otherwise remind one of this convention.  The
following lines should be in all C and C++ source and header files at
the end of the file:

/*
 * Local Variables:
 * mode: C
 * tab-width: 8
 * indent-tabs-mode: t
 * c-file-style: "stroustrup"
 * End:
 * ex: shiftwidth=4 tabstop=8
 */

In emacs, the 'indent-region' command (bound to C-M-\ by default)
does a good job of making the needed changes to conform to this
convention.  Vi can be configured to respect the ex: modeline by
adding 'set modeline=1' to your .vimrc configuration file.  Microsoft
Visual Studio should have tabs size set to 8 and indent size set to 4
with tabs kept under Tools -> Options -> Text Editor -> C/C++ -> Tabs.
The exTabSettings project will also make MSVC conform by reading our
file footers.

A similar block can be used on source and script files in other
languages (such as Tcl, Shell, Perl, etc.).  See the local variable
footer script in sh/footer.sh to automatically set/update files.

Here is an example where '.' represents a literal space character
(0x20) and '[ ]' represents a literal tab character (0x09):

int
main(int ac, char *av[])
{
....int i;
....int foo = 0;

....for (i = 0 ; i < 10; i++) {
[      ]foo += 1;
[      ]if (foo % 2) {
[      ]....printf("hello\n");
[      ]....if (foo > 5) {
[      ][      ]printf("world\n");
[      ]....}
[      ]}
....}
....return 0;
}

We may change this at some point in the future, but this is the style
for now.  If this is confusing, use spaces to indent and run sh/ws.sh
to convert spaces to tabs.  We value consistency in order to preserve
maintainability.

2) Stylistic whitespace

No space immediately inside parentheses.
  while (1) { ...                   /* ok */
  for (i = 0; i < max; i++) { ...   /* ok */
  while ( max ) { ...               /* discouraged */

Commas and semicolons are followed by whitespace.
  int main(int argc, char *argv[]); /* ok */
  for (i = 0; i < max; i++) { ...   /* ok */

Operators and arguments generally are separated with whitespace.
  if (FLAG & MORE_FLAGS) { ...      /* ok */
  for (i = 0; i < max; i++) { ...   /* ok */
  if (FLAG&MORE_FLAGS) { ...        /* discouraged */
  for (i=0; i<max; i++) { ...       /* discouraged */

No space on arrow operators.
  structure->member = 5;            /* ok */
  structure -> member = 5;          /* bad */

Native language statements (if, while, for, switch, and return)
have a separating space, functions do not.
  int my_function(int i);           /* ok, no space */
  while (argc--) ...                /* ok, has space */
  if( var == val )                  /* discouraged */
  switch(foo) ...                   /* discouraged */

Comments should have an interior space and be without tabs.
  /** good single-line doxygen */
  /* good */
  /*bad*/
  /*	discouraged */
  /*  discouraged  */
  /**
   * good:
   * multiple-line doxygen comment
   */

3) Braces

BRL-CAD uses the "The One True Brace Style" from BSD KNF and K&R.
Opening braces should be on the same line as their statement, closing
braces should line up with that same statement.  Functions, however,
are treated specially and we place their opening braces on separate
lines.  See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indent_style for details.

  int
  some_function(char *j)
  {
      for (i = 0; i < 100; i++) {
	  if (i % 10 == 0) {
	      j += 1;
	  } else {
	      j -= 1;
	  }
      }
  }

4) Names

Variable and public API function names should almost always begin with
a lowercase letter.
  double localVariable; /* ok */
  double LocalVariable; /* bad (looks like class or constructor) */
  double _localVar;     /* bad (looks like member variable)      */

Variables are not to be "decorated" to show their type (i.e., do not
use Hungarian notation or variations thereof) with a slight exception
for pointers on occasion.  The name should use a concise, meaningful
name that is not cryptic (typing a descriptive name is preferred over
someone else hunting down what was meant).
  char *name;    /* ok  */
  char *pName;   /* discouraged for new code, but okay */
  char *fooPtr;  /* bad */
  char *lpszFoo; /* bad */

Constants should be all upper-case with word boundaries optionally
separated by underscores.
  static const int MAX_READ = 2;  /* ok  */
  static const int arraySize = 8; /* bad */

Public API (global) function names are in lowercase with underscores
to separate words.  Most functions within the core libraries are named
with the following convention: [library]_[group]_[action]
  bu_vls_strcat()
  bn_mat_transpose()

Naming exceptions are allowed where the API intentionally mirrors some
other familiar programming construct (e.g., bu_malloc()+bu_free()),
but care should otherwise be taken to be as consistent as possible
within a file and across a library's API.

Here are some naming convention pairings commonly used:

  Allocation   => alloc()
  Deallocation => free()

  Initialization      => init()
  De/Reinitialization => clear()

  Allocation + Init      => create()   (new for C++)
  Deinitialize + Dealloc => destroy()  (delete for C++)

  Resource acquire => open()
  Resource release => close()

5) Debugging

Compilation preprocessor defines should never change the size of
structures.
  struct Foo {
  #ifdef DEBUG_CODE  // bad
    int _magic;
  #endif
  };

6) Comments

"//" style comments are not allowed in C source files for portability.
Comment blocks should utilize an asterisk at the beginning of each new
line.  Doxygen comments should start on the second line unless it's a
succinct /** single-line */ comment.

/* This is a
 * comment block.
 */

/**
 * This is a doxygen comment.
 */

7) Line length

We do not impose a fixed line length for source code.  Comments blocks
are formatted to column 70.

Long 'if' statements and function prototypes are okay.  Expressions
and function arguments are sometimes separated one per line where it
helps readability, but reducing the complexity of expressions and
number of function arguments is usually better.


DOCUMENTATION
-------------

BRL-CAD has extensive documentation in various formats and presently
maintained in various locations.  It is an on-going desire and goal of
the project to have all documentation located along with the source
code in our Subversion (SVN) repository.

In line with that goal and where beneficial, a large portion of the
tutorial documentation is being converted to the DocBook XML format.
Having the tutorial documentation in the DocBook XML format allows for
easier maintenance, better export conversion support, and
representation in a textual format that may be revision controlled and
tracked.

Documenting Source Code:

The source code should always be reasonably documented, this almost
goes without saying for any body of code that is to maintain some
longevity.  Determining just how much documentation is sufficient and
how much is too much is generally resolved over time, but it should
generally be looked at from the perspective of "If I look at this code
in a couple years from now, what would help me remember or understand
it better?" and add documentation accordingly.

All public library functions and most private or application functions
should be appropriately documented using Doxygen/Javadoc style
comments.  Without getting into the advanced details, this minimally
means that you need to add an additional asterisk to a comment that
precedes your functions:

/**
 * Computes the answer to the meaning of life, the universe, and
 * everything.
 */
int
the_answer(void)
{
    return 42;
}


TESTING & DEBUGGING
-------------------

BRL-CAD has extensive testing infrastructure in place to ensure tools
and APIs working a particular manner keep working in an expected way.
A testing failure usually indicates an unintended change to behavior
that must be reviewed with the provoking code justified, reverted, or
(most commonly) fixed.  There are system integration, performance,
regression, and unit tests accessible through three primary build
targets.

The BRL-CAD Benchmark, contained in the bench/ directory, validates
critical raytrace library behavior:

  make benchmark

A series of system integration regression tests, described in a series
of scripts in the regress/ directory, examines applications:

  make regress

API unit testing is contained within tests/ subdirectories of the
respective library being tested (e.g., src/libbu/tests):

  make test

Note that changes to publicly documented tools and library APIs must
adhere to BRL-CAD's change policy.  This means changes to any tests
may require thoughtful deployment.  See the CHANGES file for details.

To add new regression tests, look at regress/weight.sh for an
integration test example and src/libbu/tests/bu_vls_vprintf.c for an
API unit test example.  See their corresponding CMakeLists.txt build
file for examples of how they are added to the build.  Individual
regression tests have separate regress-TARGET build targets defined
(e.g., make regress-weight) to facilitate manual testing.

In addition to benchmark, regression, and unit testing, individual
programs may be tested after a build without installing by running
them from the build directory.  Typically, installed binaries will be
found in the bin/ subdirectory of the top-level build directory, e.g.:

  ./bin/mged

Binaries not intended for installation (i.e., marked NO_INSTALL in the
CMakeLists.txt file) are in a build path corresponding to the source
code location, e.g. the unit tests in src/libbu/tests compile into
binaries in the path/to/builddir/src/libbu/tests build directory.

A profile build, useful for some types of performance inspection
(e.g., gprof) but not enabled by default, may be specified via:

   cmake .. -DBRLCAD_ENABLE_PROFILING=ON

Debug symbols are enabled by default, even for installation, for all
libraries and binaries in order to facilitate diagnosing and
inspecting problems.  Graceful crashes (i.e., an application "bomb")
may result in a crash log (named appname-#####-bomb.log) getting
written out on platforms that have the GNU Debugger (gdb) available.
On most platforms, gdb can also be interactively utilized to inspect a
reproducible crash (graceful or otherwise):

$ gdb --args bin/mged -c file.g
...
gdb> break bu_bomb
gdb> run
...[interact with application until it crashes or bombs]
gdb> backtrace


PATCH SUBMISSION GUIDELINES
---------------------------

To contribute to BRL-CAD, begin by submitting modifications to the
patches section at http://sf.net/projects/brlcad/.  Patches in the
unified diff format (diff -u) are generally preferred when modifying
existing source or other text files.  Otherwise, contributors are
welcome to submit their changes in full to the patches tracker as
compressed file attachments.

All text patches should be submitted in the unified diff format where
it's feasible to create one either using SVN or using the unmodified
original file.  This is generally the "-u" option to diff, and is also
supported by the SVN diff command:

  svn diff > mychanges.patch

Where possible, patch files should be generated against the latest
sources available to make it easier to review and apply the changes.
If a modification involves the addition or removal of files, those
files can be provided separately with instructions on where they
belong (or what should be removed).  If SVN cannot be used, please
provide the complete release and build number of the files you worked
with.

ANY MODIFICATIONS THAT ARE PROVIDED MUST NOT MODIFY OR CONFLICT WITH
THE EXISTING "COPYING" FILE DISTRIBUTION REQUIREMENTS.  This means
that most modifications must be LGPL-compatible.  Contributors are
asked to only provide patches that may legally be incorporated into
BRL-CAD under the existing distribution provisions described in the
COPYING file.

Patches that are difficult to apply are difficult to accept.


BUGS & UNEXPECTED BEHAVIOR
--------------------------

When a bug or unexpected behavior is encountered that cannot be
quickly fixed, it needs to be documented in our BUGS file or more
formally reported to the SourceForge bug tracker at:

http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?atid=640802&group_id=105292&func=browse

The tracker is the main source for user-reported bugs and/or any
issues that require significant discussion or benefit from having
their status publicly announced.  Issues listed in BUGS file are not
necessarily listed in the tracker, and vice-versa.  The BUGS file is
also a convenience notepad of long and short term development issues.


COMMIT ACCESS
-------------

Commit access is evaluated on a person-to-person basis at the
discretion of existing contributors.  Commit access is generally
granted after a contributor demonstrates strong competency with our
developer guidelines and an existing developer with commit access
vouches for the new developer.

If you would like to have commit access, there is no need to ask.
Getting involved with the other contributors and making patches will
result in automatic consideration for commit access.  That said, the
following steps represent a minimum that needs to occur in order for
commit access to be granted:

1) Read this file completely.

2) Be able to compile BRL-CAD successfully from an SVN trunk checkout.

3) Join the brlcad-devel developer mailing list, introduce yourself.

4) Create a SourceForge account, submit at least two patches that
demonstrate competency with our coding style, apply flawlessly, and
provide some signficant improvement.

5) Get to know the other developers.  One of them will need to vouch
for your commit access.

*) Be a nice person.  ;)

Those with commit access have a responsibility to ensure that other
developers are following the guidelines that have been described in
this developer's guide within reasonable expectations.  A basic rule
of thumb is:  don't break anything.


CONTRIBUTOR RESPONSIBILITIES
----------------------------

Contributors of BRL-CAD that are granted commit access are expected to
uphold standards of conduct and adhere to conventions and procedures
outlines in this guide.  All contributors are directly supporting the
on-going development of BRL-CAD by being granted commit access.  As
such, these individuals are also considered "developers" whether they
are modifying source code or not, and have similar obligations and
expectations.  To summarize some of the expected responsibilities:

0) Primum non nocere.  All contributors are expected in good faith to
help, or at least to do no harm.  Be helpful and respectful.

1) Developers are expected to uphold the quality, functionality,
maintainability, and portability of the source code at all times.  In
part, this means that changes should be tested to avoid breaking the
build and short-term fixes are discouraged.  Committing code that is
actively being worked on is encouraged but care should be taken to
minimize impact on others and to respond quickly when an issue arises.

2) Bugs, typos, and compilation errors are to be expected as part of
the process of active software development and documentation, but it
is ultimately unacceptable to allow them to persist.  If it is
discovered that a recent modification introduces a new problem, such
as causing a compilation portability failure, then it is the
responsibility of the contributor that introduced the change to assist
in resolving the issue promptly.  It is the responsibility of all
developers to address issues as they are encountered regardless of who
introduces the problem.

3) Contributors making commits to the repository are required to
uphold the legal conventions and requirements summarized in the
COPYING file.  This includes the implicit assignment of copyright to
the U.S. Government on all contributed code unless otherwise
explicitly arranged as well as the usage of appropriate license
headers in all files where expected.  Contributors are also expected
to denote appropriate credits into the AUTHORS file when applying
contributed code and patches.

4) It is expected that developers will adhere to the coding style
conventions and filesystem organization outlined in this developer's
guide.  This includes the utilization of the specified coding style as
well as the prescribed K&R indentation convention.

5) Contributors are expected to communicate with other contributors
and to avoid code or file territorialism.  All contributors are
expected and encouraged to fix problems as they are found regardless
of where in the package they are located.  Care should of course be
taken to ensure that fixing in a bug in a section of code does not
introduce other issues, especially for unfamiliar code.  All
contributors are expect to communicate their changes publicly by
keeping documentation up-to-date, including making note of
user-visible changes in the NEWS file following the inscribed format
convention.


VERSION NUMBERS & COMPATIBILITY
-------------------------------

The BRL-CAD version number is in the include/conf directory in the
MAJOR, MINOR, and PATCH files.  The README, ChangeLog, and NEWS files
as well as a variety of documents in the doc/ directory may also make
references to version numbers.  See the MAKING A RELEASE steps listed
below for a more concise list of what needs to be updated.

Starting with release 7.0.0, BRL-CAD has adopted a three-digit version
number convention for identifying and tracking future releases.  This
number follows a common convention where the three numbers represent:

    {MAJOR_VERSION}.{MINOR_VERSION}.{PATCH_VERSION}

All "development" builds use an odd number for the minor version.  All
"release" builds use an even number for the minor version.  Patched
versions should include a release count:

    {MAJOR_VERSION}.{MINOR_VERSION}.{PATCH_VERSION}[-{RELEASE_COUNT}]

The MAJOR_VERSION should only increment when it is deemed that a
significant amount of major changes have accumulated, new features
have been added, or enough significant backwards incompatibilities
were added to make a release warrant a major version increment.  In
general, releases of BRL-CAD that differ in the MAJOR_VERSION are not
considered compatible with each other.

The MINOR_VERSION is updated more frequently and serves the dual role
as previously mentioned of easily identifying a build as a public
release.  A minor version update is generally issued after significant
development activity (generally several months of activity) has been
tested and deemed sufficiently stable.

The PATCH_VERSION may and should be updated as frequently as is
necessary.  Every public maintenance release should increment the
patch version.  Every development version modification that is
backwards incompatible in some manner should increment the patch
version number.

If it becomes necessary to update a posted release, use and increment
the RELEASE_COUNT.  The first posted release is implicitly the "-0"
release count (e.g., 7.10.2 is implicitly 7.10.2-0) with subsequent
updated releases incrementing the count (e.g., 7.10.2-1).


NAMING A SOURCE RELEASE
-----------------------

In order to achieve some consistency when preparing a source release,
the following format should be used as the filename convention:

  brlcad-{VERSION}.{EXTENSION}

VERSION is the usual version triplet described above under the section
entitled VERSION NUMBERS & COMPATIBILITY.  Example: 7.12.4

EXTENSION is the filename extension.  Compressed tar files should use
the expanded form (i.e. not tgz, etc.) unless otherwise dictated as
necessary convention by a source package management system.  Examples:

  tar.gz
  tar.bz2
  dmg
  exe
  zip


NAMING A BINARY RELEASE
-----------------------

In order to achieve some consistency when preparing a binary release,
the following format should be used as the filename convention:

  SAMS_{VERSION}[_{OS}][_{VENDOR}][_{CPU}][_{NOTE}].{EXTENSION}




PATCHING A RELEASE
------------------

Should it become necessary to patch a release that has already been
posted and announced, the mechanism is to post patch files for the
source release and update the uploaded release notes README file.



#####################################################################
# 18: Announce the new release.

The NEWS file should generally be used as a basis for making release
announcements though the announcements almost always require
modification and customization tailored to the particular forum and
audience.  Always notify the following when a release is made:

   	


#####################################################################
# 19: Sit back and enjoy a beverage for a job well done.



GETTING HELP
------------

See the GETTING STARTED section above.  Basically, communicate with
the existing developers.  There is an IRC channel, e-mail mailing
lists, and on-line forums dedicated to developer discussions.
